Heart Disease Prediction using Deep Learning
Introduction
Heart disease is one of the leading causes of mortality worldwide, and early detection plays a crucial role in improving patient outcomes. This project focuses on developing a deep learning model to predict the presence of heart disease based on various clinical features. The model is built using a structured dataset and employs thorough preprocessing techniques to optimize performance. To ensure a reliable and unbiased evaluation, stratified K-fold cross-validation is utilized, allowing for consistent assessment across different subsets of the data. The objective is to demonstrate the potential of deep learning methods in supporting clinical decision-making and enhancing the early diagnosis of heart conditions.

Table of Contents
Dataset

Project-Structure

Setup and Installation

Model Architecture

Training Process

Results

Visualization

Acknowledgements

Dataset
The dataset used (heart.csv) is loaded from Google Drive and contains information about various patient features such as:


Feature	Description
Age	The age of the patient (in years).
Sex	The gender of the patient: 1 = Male, 0 = Female.
ChestPainType	Type of chest pain experienced: TA (Typical Angina), ATA (Atypical Angina), NAP (Non-Anginal Pain), ASY (Asymptomatic).
RestingBP	Resting blood pressure (in mm Hg) when the patient was admitted.
Cholesterol	Serum cholesterol level (in mg/dl).
FastingBS	Fasting blood sugar > 120 mg/dl: 1 = True, 0 = False.
RestingECG	Resting electrocardiogram results: Normal, ST, LVH.
MaxHR	Maximum heart rate achieved during exercise.
ExerciseAngina	Whether the patient experienced exercise-induced angina: Y = Yes, N = No.
Old peak	Depression of the ST segment induced by exercise relative to rest.
ST_Slope	Slope of the peak exercise ST segment: Up, Flat, Down.
HeartDisease	Target variable: 1 = Presence of heart disease, 0 = No heart disease.
Target Variable: HeartDisease (Binary classification: 0 = No Heart Disease, 1 = Presence of Heart Disease)

Project Structure
Data Loading: Loads heart disease dataset from Google Drive.

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA): Visualizes class distributions and feature correlations.

Preprocessing: Encodes categorical features and normalizes the data.

Modeling: A deep learning model is built using TensorFlow/Keras.

Cross-Validation: Uses 5-fold Stratified K-Fold cross-validation for evaluation.

Visualization: Accuracy and loss plots over training epochs.

Setup and Installation
The project is designed to run in Google Colab.

Install required libraries using:

bash

Copy

Edit
pip install tensorflow pandas numpy scikit-learn seaborn matplotlib
Model Architecture
The deep learning model follows a simple feedforward neural network structure:

Input Layer: 11 features

Hidden Layer 1: 64 neurons, ReLU activation, 30% Dropout

Hidden Layer 2 : 32 neurons, ReLU activation

Output Layer: 1 neuron, Sigmoid activation (for binary classification)

Optimizer: Adam
Loss Function: Binary Crossentropy
Metric: Accuracy

Training Process
Cross-Validation: 5-Fold Stratified

Early Stopping: Monitors validation loss to prevent overfitting

Batch Size: 128

Epochs: Up to 50 (with early stopping if necessary)

Each fold trains a separate model and evaluates it on a validation split, reporting accuracy and loss per fold.

Results
The model's performance was evaluated using 5-fold stratified cross-validation.

📋 Fold-Wise Performance

Fold	Validation Accuracy	Validation Loss
1	87.50%	0.3281
2	82.61%	0.3570
3	81.52%	0.4209
4	89.07%	0.3060
5	84.15%	0.3592
📈 Average Performance
Average Validation Accuracy: 84.97%

Average Validation Loss: 0.3543

📊 Interpretation
The model demonstrates strong and consistent accuracy across all folds, with low validation loss.

No major overfitting was observed: training and validation metrics improved together without divergence.

Early stopping effectively prevented overtraining.

Visualization
📊 1. Class Distribution Plot
Description:
A bar plot showing the count of patients with (1) and without (0) heart disease.

Insight:

The classes are relatively balanced, slightly more patients have heart disease.

This balance reduces bias during training.

🧩 2. Feature Correlation Heatmap
Description:
A heatmap illustrating Pearson correlations between features and the target.

Insight:

ExerciseAngina, Sex, and Oldpeak show notable positive correlations with heart disease.

These features are important predictors.

📈 3. Individual Feature Distributions
Description:
Histograms with KDE for ExerciseAngina, Sex, and Oldpeak.

Insights:

Most patients do not experience angina during exercise.

There are more males than females.

Higher Oldpeak values are linked with heart disease.

📈 4. Training and Validation Accuracy Plot
The training and validation accuracy steadily increased over epochs, without major divergence, indicating good generalization. Early stopping was triggered to save the best model based on validation performance.

📉 5. Training and Validation Loss Plot
Both training and validation loss curves decreased together initially and flattened later, confirming model convergence without overfitting.

Acknowledgements
Developed using TensorFlow, Keras, Pandas, Scikit-learn, Seaborn, and Matplotlib.

Dataset sourced from publicly available heart disease data repositories.

